# Copyright (C) 2008-2009, Sebastian Riedel.

=head1 NAME

Mojo::Manual - Manual

=head1 SECTIONS

=over 4

=item L<Mojo::Manual::GettingStarted>

Step by step instructions to get you started with L<Mojo>.

=over 4

=item * Installation

=item * Running the development server

=item * Writing your first micro application and testing it

=back

=item L<Mojo::Manual::Transaction>

Everything in L<Mojo> was built around the idea of processing HTTP requests
as transactions.

=over 4

=item * HTTP Messages

=item * Request

=item * Response

=item * Cookies

=item * Parameters

=item * Content

=back

=item L<Mojo::Manual::Deployment>

Running L<Mojo> applications in different environemnts.

=over 4

=item * Designed for portability

=item * Built in servers

=item * CGI

=item * FastCGI

=item * Easy to extend

=back

=item L<Mojo::Manual::Mojolicious>

Introduction to L<Mojolicious>, the L<Mojo> example web framework.

=over 4

=item * The MVC design pattern

=item * Application class

=item * Dispatchers

=item * Controllers

=item * Routes

=item * Renderer and templates

=item * Modes

=back

=item L<Mojo::Manual::MojoliciousExample>

Building your first real web application with L<Mojolicious>, a POD reader.

=over 4

=item * Directory structure

=item * Model

=item * Controller

=item * Templates

=item * Testing

=back

=item L<Mojo::Manual::Cookbook>

Cooking with L<Mojo> and L<Mojolicious>!

=item L<Mojo::Manual::FAQ>

If you have a question, look here first.

=item L<Mojo::Manual::CodingGuidelines>

Coding guidelines and mission statement.
A must read for developers and contributors!

=back

=cut