# Copyright (C) 2008-2010, Sebastian Riedel.

=head1 NAME

Mojolicious::Book::Cheatsheet - Reference

=head1 OVERVIEW

This document contains a concise all-purpose reference.

=head1 ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES

Many parts of L<Mojolicious> can be tuned with environment variables.
Debug environment variables are excluded because they are for developer use
only.

=head2 C<MOJO_APP>

Decides which L<Mojolicious> or L<Mojo> application will be used, should
always contain a class name like C<MyApp>.

    MOJO_APP=MyApp

=head2 C<MOJO_CA_FILE>

The path to the TLS CA authority file, should always contain a path like
C</etc/tls/cacerts.pem>.
Note that L<IO::Socket::SSL> must be installed for TLS support.

    MOJO_CA_FILE=/etc/tls/cacerts.pem

=head2 C<MOJO_CHUNK_SIZE>

Chunk size used for IO operations in bytes, a bigger chunk size speeds up IO
operations but will also use more memory.

    MOJO_CHUNK_SIZE=1024

=head2 C<MOJO_EPOLL>

Force epoll mainloop for IO operations.
Note that L<IO::Epoll> must be installed for epoll support.

    MOJO_EPOLL=1

=head2 C<MOJO_HOME>

Home directory for the L<Mojolicious> application, should always contain a
path like C</home/sri/myapp>.

    MOJO_HOME=/home/sri/myapp

=head2 C<MOJO_KQUEUE>

Force kqueue mainloop for IO operations.
Note that L<IO::KQueue> must be installed for kqueue support.

    MOJO_KQUEUE=1

=head2 C<MOJO_LOG_LEVEL>

Log level for the L<Mojolicious> application, should contain a valid log
level like C<debug> or C<error>.

    MOJO_LOG_LEVEL=debug
    MOJO_LOG_LEVEL=error

=head2 C<MOJO_MAX_LINE_SIZE>

Maximum line size for HTTP message start lines and headers in bytes, defaults
to C<10240>.

    MOJO_MAX_LINE_SIZE=2048

=head2 C<MOJO_MAX_MEMORY_SIZE>

Maximum size in bytes for HTTP content to keep in memory, bigger content will
be written to temporary files, defaults to C<24576>.

    MOJO_MAX_MEMORY_SIZE=2048

=head2 C<MOJO_MAX_MESSAGE_SIZE>

Maximum size for HTTP messages in bytes, defaults to C<524288>.

    MOJO_MAX_MESSAGE_SIZE=1024

=head2 C<MOJO_MODE>

Run mode for the L<Mojolicious> application, should contain a valid mode like
C<development> or C<production>.

    MOJO_MODE=development
    MOJO_MODE=production

=head2 C<MOJO_NO_IPV6>

Disable IPv6 support, this might result in slightly better performance and
less memory use.
Note that L<IO::Socket::INET6> must be installed for IPv6 support.

    MOJO_NO_IPV6=1

=head2 C<MOJO_NO_TLS>

Disable TLS support, this might result in slightly better performance and
less memory use.
Note that L<IO::Socket::SSL> must be installed for TLS support.

    MOJO_NO_TLS=1

=head2 C<MOJO_POLL>

Force poll mainloop for IO operations, this should only be used for testing
since other mainloops are generally faster and scale better.

    MOJO_POLL=1

=head2 C<MOJO_RELOAD>

Enable L<Mojolicious> application reloading, changes to your application will
be detected automatically so you don't have to restart the server manually.

    MOJO_RELOAD=1

=head2 C<MOJO_REVERSE_PROXY>

Enable reverse proxy support for L<Mojolicious> application.

    MOJO_REVERSE_PROXY=1

=head2 C<MOJO_TEMPLATE_CLASS>

Class the L<Mojolicious> renderer should use to find C<DATA> templates,
defaults to C<main>.

    MOJO_TEMPLATE_CLASS=MyApp

=head2 C<MOJO_TMPDIR>

Directory for temporary files like huge uploads, by default a random platform
specific temporary directory will be used.

    MOJO_TMPDIR=/tmp/mojo

=cut
