# Copyright (C) 2008-2010, Sebastian Riedel.

=head1 NAME

Mojolicious::Book::CodingGuidelines - Coding Guidelines

=head1 OVERVIEW

This document describes the coding guidelines that are the foundations
of L<Mojo> and L<Mojolicious> development.

Please don't send patches unless you agree with them.

=head1 MISSION STATEMENT

L<Mojo> is a runtime environment for Perl web frameworks.
It provides all the basic tools and helpers needed to write simple web
applications and higher level web frameworks such as L<Mojolicious> and
L<Mojolicious::Lite>.

All components should be reusable in other projects and in a UNIXish way
only loosely coupled.

Especially for people new to Perl it should be as easy as possible to
install Mojo and get started.
Writing web applications can be one of the most fun ways to learn a language!

For developers of other web frameworks it should be possible to reuse all the
infrastructure and just consider the higher levels of the L<Mojo>
distribution an example application.

=head1 RULES

=over 4

Keep it simple, no magic unless absolutely necessary.

Code should be written with a Perl6 port in mind.

No refactoring unless a very important feature absolutely depends on it.

It's not a feature without a test.

A feature is only needed when the majority of the userbase benefits from it.

Features may not be changed without being deprecated for at least one major
release.

Deprecating a feature should be avoided at all costs.

Only add prereqs if absolutely necessary.

Domain specific languages should be avoided in favor of Perl'ish solutions.

No inline POD.

Documentation belongs to the book, module POD is just an API reference.

Lines should not be longer than 78 characters and we indent with 4
whitespaces.

Code should be run through L<Perl::Tidy> with the included C<.perltidyrc>.

No spaghetti code.

Code should be organized in blocks and those blocks should be commented.

Comments should be funny if possible.

Every file should contain at least one quote from C<The Simpsons> or
C<Futurama>.

No names outside of the CREDITS section of Mojo.pm.

No Elitism.

Peace!

=back

=cut
