# Copyright (C) 2008, Sebastian Riedel.

=head1 NAME

Mojo::Manual::Mojolicious - Mojolicious

=head1 ROUTES

Routes allow you to map urls to controller classes and methods. If you are
already familiar with Ruby on Rails you will notice almost similar behavior.

=head2 Terms

There are a couple of terms to know. B<Url> refers to a request path. B<Map>
is the rule that matches a given path. B<Route> is the path to a class and
method to be called with additional parameters. It is possible to convert a
B<Map> to a B<Route> and to convert a B<Route> to a B<Url>.

=head2 Simple route

Let's look at the example.

    # /articles
    $r->route('/articles')->to(controller => 'article', action => 'list');

When a user requests C</articles>, the module C<Article.pm> is loaded and the
method C<list> will be called. C<controller> and C<action> values are
important, because they decide what is going to be called if a url matches
the given map.

=head2 Additional parameters

Besides C<controller> and C<action> you can define as many parameters as you
like.

    # /articles (sort_by = 'date')
    $r->route('/articles')
      ->to(controller => 'article, action => 'list', sort_by => 'date');

=head2 Placeholders

Maps can be more specific and automatically provide parameters through
placeholders.

    # /*
    $r->route('/:controller')->to(action => 'list');

The colon means that C<controller> will be automatically captured and passed
along.

=head2 Default values

You can specify default values for all parameters.

    # /* (id = 1)
    # /*/*
    $r->route('/:controller/:id')->to(action => 'view', id => 1);

The value for C<id> will be C<1> if it's not specified.

=head2 Constraints

Parameters can also have constraints.

    # /articles/5
    $r->route('/articles/:id', id => qr/\d+/)
      ->to(controller => 'article', action => 'view');

This will only match if C<id> is a number. There is no need to specify C<^>
and C<$>, because they are automatically added.

=head2 Optional parameters

Values are required if no default value was given. You can also just set
default values to C<undef> to make them entirely optional.

    # /archive
    # /archive/2008
    $r->route('/archive/:year')
      ->to(controller => 'archive', action => 'list', year => undef);

=head2 Nested routes

Don't repeat yourself. For a given root map you can have multiple nested
maps. This can be used to factor out repetitive code.

    # /books/5/edit
    # /books/5/delete
    my $b = $r->route('/books/:id')->to(controller => 'book');
    $b->route('/edit')->to(action => 'edit');
    $b->route('/delete')->to(action => 'delete');

=head2 Gates

Sometimes it is neccessary to call multiple method after another (e.g.
authorization, data processing). That's what gates are for.

    # /blog
    $r->gate->to(controller => 'foo', action =>'auth')
      ->route('/blog')->to(action => 'list');

C<Foo::auth> will be called before C<Foo::list>.

=head2 Waypoints

Waypoint is something in between gates and nested routes. It can match even
if it's not an endpoint, but will behave just like C<route> if children are
matching too.

    # /books
    my $b = $r->waypoint('/books')->to(controller => 'books', action => 'list');

    # /books/1
    $b->route('/:id', id => qr/\d+/)->to(action => 'view');

=head2 Quoted symbols

It is not only possible to catch parameters from slash to slash, you can also
quote them with parentheses for more advanced matching.

    # /view-5
    # /delete-1
    $r->route('/:(action)-:(id)')->to(controller => 'album');

=cut