
=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

Mojolicious::Guides::Contributing - Contributing to Mojolicious

=head1 OVERVIEW

There are many ways to contribute to L<Mojolicious>, this guide will show you a
few of them.

=head1 REPORTING BUGS

We use the L<GitHub issue tracker|https://github.com/kraih/mojo/issues>, so
you'll need to create a (free) GitHub account to be able to submit issues,
comments and pull requests.

First of all, make sure you are using the latest version of L<Mojolicious>, it
is quite likely that your bug has already been fixed. If that doesn't help,
take a look at the list of currently open issues, perhaps it has already been
reported by someone else and you can just add a comment confirming it.

If it hasn't been reported yet, try to prepare a test case demonstrating the
bug, you are not expected to fix it yourself, but you'll have to make sure the
developers can replicate your problem. Sending in your whole application
generally does more harm than good, the C<t> directory of this distribution has
many good examples for how to do it right. Writing a test is usually the
hardest part of fixing a bug, so the better your test case the faster it can be
fixed. ;)

And don't forget to add a descriptive title and text, when you create a new
issue. If your issue does not contain enough information or is unintelligible,
it might get closed pretty quickly. But don't be disheartened, if there's new
activity it will get reopened just as quickly.

=head2 Reporting security issues

Please report security issues directly to the pumpkin-holder via email, which is
currently Sebastian Riedel (C<sri@cpan.org>), and give us a few days to develop
and release a proper fix.

=head1 RESOLVING ISSUES

There are many ways in which you can help us resolve existing issues on the
L<GitHub issue tracker|https://github.com/kraih/mojo/issues>.

Can you replicate the problem on your computer? Add a comment saying that
you're seeing the same. Perhaps you can provide additional information that
will make it easier for others to replicate the problem, maybe even contribute
a better test case.

And for all code contributions we very much appreciate additional testing and
code review, just add a comment to show your approval or to point out flaws
that need to be addressed.

=head1 CONTRIBUTING DOCUMENTATION

One of the easiest ways to contribute to L<Mojolicious> is through
documentation improvements. While the L<Mojolicious::Guides> are carefully
curated by the core team, everybody with a (free) GitHub account can make
changes and add new information to the
L<Mojolicious wiki|http://github.com/kraih/mojo/wiki>.

Pull requests with additions or changes to the documentation included in the
L<Mojolicious> distribution follow the same rules as code contributions. Please
don't send pull requests for overly simplistic changes, such as the addition of
a comma or semicolon.

=head1 CONTRIBUTING CODE

All code contributions should be sent as
L<GitHub pull requests|https://help.github.com/articles/using-pull-requests>.

An expressive title and detailed description are invaluable during the review
process, which usually ends when members of the community have voiced their
opinions and the core team voted for or against a change. All code changes
should emulate the style of the surrounding code, include tests that fail
without them, and update relevant documentation.

While the L<Mojolicious> distribution covers a wide range of features, we are
rather conservative when it comes to adding new ones. So if your contribution
is not a bug fix, you can drastically increase its chances of getting accepted
by discussing it in advance on the
L<mailing list|http://groups.google.com/group/mojolicious> or the official IRC
channel C<#mojo> on C<irc.perl.org>
(L<chat now!|https://chat.mibbit.com/?channel=%23mojo&server=irc.perl.org>).

The following mission statement and rules are the foundation of all L<Mojo> and
L<Mojolicious> development. Please make sure that your contribution aligns well
with them before sending a pull request.

=head2 Mission statement

L<Mojo> is a web development toolkit, with all the basic tools and helpers
needed to write simple web applications and higher level web frameworks, such as
L<Mojolicious>.

All components should be reusable in other projects, and in a UNIXish way only
loosely coupled.

Especially for people new to Perl it should be as easy as possible to install
L<Mojolicious> and get started. Writing web applications can be one of the most
fun ways to learn a language!

For developers of other web frameworks, it should be possible to reuse all the
infrastructure and just consider the higher levels of the L<Mojolicious>
distribution an example application.

=head2 Rules

=over 2

Web development should be easy and fun, this is what we optimize for.

The web is a moving target, to stay relevant we have to stay in motion too.

Keep it simple, no magic unless absolutely necessary.

The installation process should be as fast and painless as possible. (Less than
a minute on most common hardware is a good rule of thumb)

The addition and modification of features is decided by majority vote or the
pumpkin-holder.

Any core developer may nominate a new one, who must then be accepted by a 2/3
majority vote.

The pumpkin-holder has veto rights and may select their successor.

It's not a feature without a test and documentation.

A feature is only needed when the majority of the user base benefits from it.

Features may only be changed in a major release, to fix a serious security
issue, or after being deprecated for at least 3 months.

Refactoring and deprecations should be avoided if there are no substantial
benefits.

New features can be marked as experimental to be excluded from deprecation
policies.

A major release is signaled by a new major version number and a unique code
name based on a Unicode character.

Only add dependencies if absolutely necessary and make them optional if
possible.

Domain specific languages should be avoided in favor of Perl-ish solutions.

No inline POD.

Documentation belongs to the guides, module POD is just an API reference.

The main focus of the included documentation should be on examples, no walls of
text. (An example for every one or two sentences is a good rule of thumb)

Everything should be ordered alphabetically if possible, or at least be
consistent if not.

The master source code repository should always be kept in a stable state, use
feature branches for actual development.

Code has to be run through L<Perl::Tidy> with the included
L<.perltidyrc|https://github.com/kraih/mojo/blob/master/.perltidyrc>, and
everything should look like it was written by a single person.

Functions and methods should be as short as possible, no spaghetti code.

Comments should be correctly capitalized, and funny if possible, punctuation is
optional if it doesn't increase readability.

No names outside of C<Mojolicious.pm>.

=back

=head1 DONATIONS

L<Mojolicious> is open source and free to use. However, the amount of effort
needed to maintain the project and develop new features for it is not
sustainable without proper financial backing. You can support the ongoing
development of L<Mojolicious> through
L<Gratipay|https://gratipay.com/mojolicious>,
L<PayPal|https://www.paypal.me/kraih> or Bitcoin
(C<1Cid78CmK4hvf78Ry8K2XeDx8pQHNh4hbz>).

If you run a business and use L<Mojolicious> in a revenue generating product, it
makes business sense to support L<Mojolicious> development. Because it ensures
that the project your product relies on stays healthy and actively maintained.
It can also help your exposure within the community and will make it easier to
attract L<Mojolicious> developers.

Please email Sebastian Riedel (C<sri@cpan.org>) if you have any questions about
becoming a sponsor.

=head1 CODE OF CONDUCT

Like the technical community as a whole, the L<Mojolicious> team and community
is made up of a mixture of professionals and volunteers from all over the world,
working on every aspect of the mission - including mentorship, teaching, and
connecting people.

Diversity is one of our huge strengths, but it can also lead to communication
issues and unhappiness. To that end, we have a few ground rules that we ask
people to adhere to. This code applies equally to founders, mentors and those
seeking help and guidance.

This isn’t an exhaustive list of things that you can’t do. Rather, take it in
the spirit in which it’s intended - a guide to make it easier to enrich all of
us and the technical communities in which we participate.

This code of conduct applies to all spaces managed by the L<Mojolicious>
project. This includes IRC, the mailing lists, the issue tracker, and any other
forums created by the project team which the community uses for communication.
In addition, violations of this code outside these spaces may affect a person's
ability to participate within them.

If you believe someone is violating the code of conduct, we ask that you report
it by emailing Joel Berger (C<jberger@cpan.org>) or other members of
L<the team|Mojolicious/"CORE DEVELOPERS">.

=over 2

=item * B<Be friendly and patient.>

=item * B<Be welcoming.> We strive to be a community that welcomes and supports
people of all backgrounds and identities. This includes, but is not limited to
members of any race, ethnicity, culture, national origin, colour, immigration
status, social and economic class, educational level, sex, sexual orientation,
gender identity and expression, age, size, family status, political belief,
religion, and mental and physical ability.

=item * B<Be considerate.> Your work will be used by other people, and you in
turn will depend on the work of others. Any decision you take will affect users
and colleagues, and you should take those consequences into account when making
decisions. Remember that we're a world-wide community, so you might not be
communicating in someone else's primary language.

=item * B<Be respectful.> Not all of us will agree all the time, but
disagreement is no excuse for poor behavior and poor manners. We might all
experience some frustration now and then, but we cannot allow that frustration
to turn into a personal attack. It’s important to remember that a community
where people feel uncomfortable or threatened is not a productive one. Members
of the L<Mojolicious> community should be respectful when dealing with other
members as well as with people outside the L<Mojolicious> community.

=item * B<Be careful in the words that you choose.> We are a community of
professionals, and we conduct ourselves professionally. Be kind to others. Do
not insult or put down other participants. Harassment and other exclusionary
behavior aren't acceptable. This includes, but is not limited to:

=over 2

=item * Violent threats or language directed against another person.

=item * Discriminatory jokes and language.

=item * Posting sexually explicit or violent material.

=item * Posting (or threatening to post) other people's personally identifying
information ("doxing").

=item * Personal insults, especially those using racist or sexist terms.

=item * Unwelcome sexual attention.

=item * Advocating for, or encouraging, any of the above behavior.

=item * Repeated harassment of others. In general, if someone asks you to stop,
then stop.

=back

=item * B<When we disagree, try to understand why.> Disagreements, both social
and technical, happen all the time and L<Mojolicious> is no exception. It is
important that we resolve disagreements and differing views constructively.
Remember that we’re different. The strength of L<Mojolicious> comes from its
varied community, people from a wide range of backgrounds. Different people have
different perspectives on issues. Being unable to understand why someone holds a
viewpoint doesn’t mean that they’re wrong. Don’t forget that it is human to err
and blaming each other doesn’t get us anywhere. Instead, focus on helping to
resolve issues and learning from mistakes.

=back

Original text courtesy of the L<Speak Up! project|http://speakup.io/coc.html>.

=head1 FORK POLICY

The L<Mojolicious> core team believes that there is a lot of value in the entire
toolkit being a unified project. Forks drain resources from a project, not just
mindshare but also very valuable bug reports and patches, which can have very
serious security implications. Therefore we ask that you please not publically
fork pieces of the L<Mojolicious> distribution without our consent. As doing so
is against our express wishes, individuals who engage in unauthorized forking
may be denied from participating in community sponsored spaces.

For developers considering the use of a forked module, we strongly recommend
that you make yourself familiar with its history and track record. While many
parts of L<Mojolicious> have been forked in the past, very few forks have been
able to keep up with L<Mojolicious> development, and most are missing critical
bug fixes.

=head1 MORE

You can continue with L<Mojolicious::Guides> now or take a look at the
L<Mojolicious wiki|http://github.com/kraih/mojo/wiki>, which contains a lot
more documentation and examples by many different authors.

=head1 SUPPORT

If you have any questions the documentation might not yet answer, don't
hesitate to ask on the
L<mailing list|http://groups.google.com/group/mojolicious> or the official IRC
channel C<#mojo> on C<irc.perl.org>
(L<chat now!|https://chat.mibbit.com/?channel=%23mojo&server=irc.perl.org>).

=cut
