
=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

Mojolicious::Guides::Testing - Web Application Testing Made Easy

=head1 OVERVIEW

This document is an introduction to testing web applications with
L<Test::Mojo>. L<Test::Mojo> can be thought of as a module that provides all
of the tools and testing assertions needed to test web applications in a
Perlish way.

While L<Test::Mojo> can be used to test any web application, it has shortcuts
designed to make testing L<Mojolicious> web applications easy and pain-free.

Please refer to the L<Test::Mojo> documentation for a complete reference to
many of the ideas and syntax introduced in this document.

A test file for a simple web application might look like:

  use Mojo::Base -strict;

  use Test::Mojo;
  use Test::More;

  # Start a Mojolicious app named "Celestial"
  my $t = Test::Mojo->new('Celestial');

  # Post a JSON document
  $t->post_ok('/notifications',
              json => { event   => 'full moon',
                        via     => 'sms',
                        channel => '+15555555555' })
    ->status_is(201)
    ->json_is('/message' => 'notification created');

  # Perform GET requests and look at the responses
  $t->get_ok('/sunrise')
    ->status_is(200)
    ->content_like(qr/ am$/);

  $t->get_ok('/sunset')
    ->status_is(200)
    ->content_like(qr/ pm$/);

  # Post a URL-encoded form
  $t->post_ok('/insurance',
              form => { name   => 'Jimmy',
                        amount => '3.000.000',
                        currency => '€' })
    ->status_is(200);

  # Use Test::More's like() to check the response
  like $t->tx->res->dom->at('div#thanks')->text, qr(thank you), 'thanks';

  done_testing();

In the rest of this document we'll explore these concepts and others related
to L<Test::Mojo>.

=head1 CONCEPTS

Essentials every L<Mojolicious> developer should know.

=head2 L<Test::Mojo> at a glance

The L<Test::More> module bundled with Perl includes several primitive test
assertions, such as C<ok>, C<is>, C<isnt>, C<like>, C<unlike>, C<cmp_ok>,
etc. An assertion "passes" if its expression returns a true value. The
assertion method prints "ok" or "not ok" if an assertion passes or fails
(respectively).

L<Test::Mojo> supplies additional test assertions organized around the web
application request/response transaction (transport, response headers,
response bodies, etc.), and WebSocket communications.

One interesting thing of note: the return value of L<Test::Mojo> object
assertions is always the test object itself, allowing us to "chain" test
assertion methods. So rather than grouping related test statements like this:

  $t->get_ok('/frogs');
  $t->status_is(200);
  $t->content_like(qr/bullfrog/);
  $t->content_like(qr/hypnotoad/);

method chaining allows us to connect test assertions that belong together:

  $t->get_ok('/frogs')
    ->status_is(200)
    ->content_like(qr/bullfrog/)
    ->content_like(qr/hypnotoad/);

This makes for a much more I<concise> and I<coherent> testing experience:
concise because we are not repeating the invocant for each test, and coherent
because assertions that belong to the same request are syntactically bound in
the same method chain.

Occasionally it makes sense to break up a test to perform more complex
assertions on a response. L<Test::Mojo> exposes the entire transaction object
so you can get all the data you need from a response:

  $t->put_ok('/bees', json => { type => 'worker', name => 'Karl' })
    ->status_is(202)
    ->json_has('/id');

  # Pull out the id from the response
  my $newbee = $t->tx->res->json('/id');

  # Make a new request with data from the previous response
  $t->get_ok("/bees/$newbee")
    ->status_is(200)
    ->json_is('/name' => 'Karl');

The L<Test::Mojo> object is I<stateful>. As long as we haven't started a new
transaction by invoking one of the C<*_ok> methods, the request and response
objects from the previous transaction are available in the L<Test::Mojo>
object:

  # First transaction
  $t->get_ok('/frogs?q=bullfrog', { 'Content-Type' => 'application/json' })
    ->status_is(200)
    ->json_like('/0/species' => qr/catesbeianus/i);

  # Still first transaction
  $t->content_type_is('application/json');

  # Second transaction
  $t->get_ok('/frogs?q=banjo', { 'Content-Type' => 'text/html' })
    ->status_is(200)
    ->content_like(qr/interioris/i);

  # Still second transaction
  $t->content_type_is('text/html');

This statefulness also enables L<Test::Mojo> to handle sessions, follow
redirects, and inspect past responses during a redirect.

=head2 The L<Test::Mojo> object

The L<Test::Mojo> object manages the Mojolicious application lifecycle (if a
Mojolicious application class is supplied) as well as exposes the built-in
L<Mojo::UserAgent> object. To create a bare L<Test::Mojo> object:

  my $t = Test::Mojo->new;

This object initializes a L<Mojo::UserAgent> object and provides a variety of
test assertion methods for accessing a web application. For example, with this
object, we could test any running web application:

  $t->get_ok('https://www.google.com/')
    ->status_is(200)
    ->content_like(qr/search/i);

You can access the user agent directly if you want to make web requests
without triggering test assertions:

  my $tx = $t->ua->post('https://duckduckgo.com/html',
                        form => {q => 'hypnotoad'});

  $tx->result->dom->find('a.result__a')
    ->each(sub { say $_->text });

See L<Mojo::UserAgent> for the complete API and return values.

=head2 Testing Mojolicious applications

If you pass the name of a L<Mojolicious> application class (e.g., 'MyApp') to
the L<Test::Mojo> constructor, L<Test::Mojo> will instantiate the class and
start it, and cause it to listen on a random (unused) port number. Testing a
Mojolicious application using L<Test::Mojo> will never conflict with running
applications, including the application you're testing.

The L<Mojo::UserAgent> object in L<Test::Mojo> will know where the application
is running and make requests to it. Once the tests have completed, the
L<Mojolicious> application will be torn down.

  # Listens on localhost:32114 - some unused TCP port
  my $t = Test::Mojo->new('Frogs');

This object initializes a L<Mojo::UserAgent> object, loads the Mojolicious
application C<Frogs>, binds and listens on a free TCP port (e.g., 32114), and
starts the application event loop. When the L<Test::Mojo> object (C<$t>) goes
out of scope, the application is stopped.

Relative URLs in the test object method assertions (C<get_ok>, C<post_ok>,
etc.) will be sent to the Mojolicious application started by L<Test::Mojo>:

  # Rewritten to http://localhost:32114/frogs
  $t->get_ok('/frogs');

L<Test::Mojo> has a lot of handy shortcuts built into it to make testing
L<Mojolicious> or L<Mojolicious::Lite> applications enjoyable.

=head3 An example

Let's spin up a Mojolicious application using C<mojo generate app MyApp>. The
C<mojo> utility will create a working application and a C<t> directory with a
working test file:

  $ mojo generate app MyApp
  [mkdir] /my_app/script
  [write] /my_app/script/my_app
  [chmod] /my_app/script/my_app 744
  ...
  [mkdir] /my_app/t
  [write] /my_app/t/basic.t
  ...

Let's run the tests (we'll create the C<log> directory to quiet the
application output):

  $ cd my_app
  $ mkdir log
  $ prove -lv t
  t/basic.t ..
  ok 1 - GET /
  ok 2 - 200 OK
  ok 3 - content is similar
  1..3
  ok
  All tests successful.
  Files=1, Tests=3,  0 wallclock secs ( 0.03 usr  0.01 sys +  0.33 cusr  0.07 csys =  0.44 CPU)
  Result: PASS

The boilerplate test file looks like this:

  use Mojo::Base -strict;

  use Test::More;
  use Test::Mojo;

  my $t = Test::Mojo->new('MyApp');
  $t->get_ok('/')->status_is(200)->content_like(qr/Mojolicious/i);

  done_testing();

Here we can see our application class name C<MyApp> is passed to the
L<Test::Mojo> constructor. Under the hood, L<Test::Mojo> creates a new
L<Mojo::Server> instance, loads C<MyApp> (which we just created), and runs the
application. We write our tests with relative URLs because L<Test::Mojo> takes
care of getting the request to the running test application (since its port
may change between runs).

=head3 Testing with configuration data

We can alter the behavior of our application using environment variables (such
as C<MOJO_MODE>) and through configuration values. One nice feature of
L<Test::Mojo> is its ability to pass configuration values directly from its
constructor.

Let's modify our application and add a "feature flag" to enable a new feature
when the C<enable_weather> configuration value is set:

  # Load configuration from hash returned by "my_app.conf"
  my $config = $self->plugin('Config');

  # Normal route to controller
  $r->get('/')->to('example#welcome');

  # NEW: this route only exists when 'enable_weather' is set in the configuration
  if ($config->{enable_weather}) {
      $r->get('/weather')->to(cb => sub { shift->render(text => "It's hot! 🔥") }
  }

To test this new feature, we don't even need to create a configuration file—we
can simply pass the configuration data to the application directly via
L<Test::Mojo>'s constructor:

  my $t = Test::Mojo->new('MyApp', { enable_weather => 1 });
  $t->get_ok('/')->status_is(200)->content_like(qr/Mojolicious/i);
  $t->get_ok('/weather')->status_is(200)->content_like(qr/🔥/);

When we run these tests, L<Test::Mojo> will pass this configuration data to
the application, which will cause it to create a special C</weather> route
that we can access in our tests. Unless C<enable_weather> is set in a
configuration file, this route will not exist when the application
runs. Feature flags like this allow us to do soft rollouts of features,
targeting a small audience for a period of time. Once the feature has been
proven, we can refactor the conditional and make it a full release.

This example shows how easy it is to start testing a Mojolicious application
and how to set specific application configuration directives from a test file.

=head3 Testing application helpers

Let's say we register a helper in our application to generate an HTTP Basic
Auth header value:

  use Mojo::Util 'b64_encode';

  app->helper(basic_auth => sub {
    shift;
    return 'Basic ' . b64_encode join(':' => @_), '';
  });

How do we test application helpers like this? L<Test::Mojo> has access to the
application object, which allows us to invoke helpers from our test file:

  my $t = Test::Mojo->new('MyApp');

  is( $t->app->basic_auth(bif => "Bif's Passwerdd"),
      'Basic YmlmOkJpZidzIFBhc3N3ZXJkZA==',
      'correct header value' );

Any aspect of the application (helpers, plugins, routes, session data, etc.)
can be introspected from L<Test::Mojo> through the application object. This
enables us to get deep test coverage of L<Mojolicious>-based applications.

=head2 HTTP request assertions

L<Test::Mojo> has a L<Mojo::UserAgent> object that allows it to make HTTP
requests and check for HTTP transport errors. HTTP request assertions include
C<get_ok>, C<post_ok>, etc. These assertions do not test whether the request
was handled I<successfully>, only that the web application handled the request
in an HTTP compliant way.

You may also make HTTP requests using custom verbs (beyond C<GET>, C<POST>,
C<PUT>, etc.) by building your own transaction object. See L</"Custom
Transactions"> below.

=head3 Using HTTP request assertions

To post a URL-encoded form to the C</calls> endpoint of an application, we
simply use the C<form> content type shortcut:

  $t->post_ok('/calls', form => { to => '+43.55.555.5555' });

which will create the following HTTP request:

  POST /calls HTTP/1.1
  Content-Length: 20
  Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded

  to=%2B43.55.555.5555

The C<*_ok> HTTP request assertion methods accept the same arguments as their
corresponding L<Mojo::UserAgent> methods (except for the callback
argument). This allows us to set headers and build query strings for authentic
test situations:

  $t->get_ok('/internal/personnel',
             { Authorization => 'Internal secret-password' },
             form => { q => 'Professor Plum' });

which generates the following request:

  GET /internal/personnel?q=Professor+Plum HTTP/1.1
  Content-Length: 0
  Authorization: Internal secret-password

The C<form> content generator (see L<Mojo::UserAgent::Transactor>) will
generate a query string for C<GET> requests and
C<application/x-www-form-urlencoded> or C<multipart/form-data> for POST
requests.

While these C<*_ok> assertions make the HTTP I<requests> we expect, they tell
us little about I<how well> the application handled the request. The
application we're testing might have returned any content-type, body, or HTTP
status code (200, 302, 400, 404, 500, etc.) and we wouldn't know it.

L<Test::Mojo> provides assertions to test almost every aspect of the HTTP
response, including the HTTP response status code, the value of the
C<Content-Type> header, and other arbitrary HTTP header information.

=head2 HTTP response status code

While not technically an HTTP header, the status line is the first line in an
HTTP response and is followed by the response headers. Testing the response
status code is common in REST-based and other web applications that use the
HTTP status codes to broadly indicate the type of response the server is
returning.

Testing the status code is as simple as adding the C<status_is> assertion:

  $t->post_ok('/doorbell',
              form => { action => 'ring once' })
    ->status_is(200);

Along with C<status_isnt>, this will cover most needs. For more elaborate
status code testing, you can access the status code directly:

  $t->post_ok('/doorbell',
              form => { action => 'ring once' });
  is($t->tx->res->message, 'Moved Permanently', 'try next door');

=head2 HTTP response headers

L<Test::Mojo> allows us to inspect and make assertions about HTTP response
headers. The C<Content-Type> header is commonly tested and has its own
assertion:

  $t->get_ok('/map-of-the-world.pdf')
    ->content_type_is('application/pdf');

This is equivalent to the more verbose:

  $t->get_ok('/map-of-the-world.pdf')
    ->header_is('Content-Type' => 'application/pdf');

We can test for multiple headers in a single response using method chains:

  $t->get_ok('/map-of-the-world.pdf')
    ->content_type_is('application/pdf')
    ->header_isnt('Compression' => 'gzip')
    ->header_unlike('Server' => qr/IIS/i);

=head2 HTTP response content assertions

L<Test::Mojo> also exposes a rich set of assertions for testing the body of a
response, whether that body be HTML, plain-text, or JSON. The C<content_*>
methods look at the body of the response as plain text (as defined by the
response's character set):

  $t->get_ok('/scary-things/spiders.json')
    ->content_is('{"arachnid":"brown recluse"}');

Although this is a JSON document, C<content_is> treats it as if it were a text
document. This may be useful for situations where we're looking for a
particular string and not concerned with the structure of the document. For
example, we can do the same thing with an HTML document:

  $t->get_ok('/scary-things/spiders.html')
    ->content_like(qr{<title>All The Spiders</title>});

But because L<Test::Mojo> has access to everything that L<Mojo::UserAgent>
does, we can introspect JSON documents as well as DOM-based documents (HTML,
XML) with assertions that allow us to check for the existence of elements as
well as inspect the content of text nodes.

=head2 JSON response assertions

L<Test::Mojo>'s L<Mojo::UserAgent> has access to a JSON parser, which allows
us to test to see if a JSON response contains a value at a location in the
document using JSON pointer syntax:

  $t->get_ok('/animals/friendly.json')
    ->json_has('/beings/jeremiah/age');

This assertion tells us that the C<friendly.json> document contains a value at
the C</beings/jeremiah/age> JSON pointer location. We can also inspect the
value at JSON pointer locations:

  $t->get_ok('/animals/friendly.json')
    ->json_has('/beings/jeremiah/age')
    ->json_is('/beings/jeremiah/age' => 42)
    ->json_like('/beings/jeremiah/species' => qr/bullfrog/i);

JSON pointer syntax make testing JSON responses simple and readable.

=head2 DOM response assertions

We can also inspect HTML and XML responses using the L<Mojo::DOM> parser in
the user agent. Here are a few examples from the L<Test::Mojo> documentation:

  $t->text_is('div.foo[x=y]' => 'Hello!');
  $t->text_is('html head title' => 'Hello!', 'right title');

The L<Mojo::DOM> parser uses CSS selector syntax, allowing us to test for
values in HTML and XML documents without resorting to typically verbose and
inflexible DOM traversal methods.

=head2 Redirects

The L<Mojo::UserAgent> object in L<Test::Mojo> can handle HTTP redirections
internally to whatever level you need. Let's say we have a web service that
redirects C</1> to C</2>, C</2> redirects to C</3>, C</3> redirects to C</4>,
and C</4> redirects to C</5>:

  GET /1

returns:

  302 Found
  Location: /2

and:

  GET /2

returns:

  302 Found
  Location: /3

and so forth, up to C</5>:

  GET /5

which returns the data we wanted:

  200 OK

  {"message":"this is five"}

We can tell the user agent in L<Test::Mojo> how to deal with redirects. Each
test is making a request to C<GET /1>, but we vary the number of redirects the
user agent should follow with each test:

  my $t = Test::Mojo->new;

  $t->get_ok('/1')
    ->header_is(location => '/2');

  $t->ua->max_redirects(1);
  $t->get_ok('/1')
    ->header_is(location => '/3');

  $t->ua->max_redirects(2);
  $t->get_ok('/1')
    ->header_is(location => '/4');

  # look at the previous hop
  is $t->tx->previous->res->headers->location, '/3', 'previous redirect';

  $t->ua->max_redirects(3);
  $t->get_ok('/1')
    ->header_is(location => '/5');

  $t->ua->max_redirects(4);
  $t->get_ok('/1')
    ->json_is('/message' => 'this is five');

When we set C<max_redirects>, it stays set for the life of the test object
until we change it.

L<Test::Mojo>'s handling of HTTP redirects eliminates the need for making
many, sometimes an unknown number, of redirections to keep testing precise and
easy to follow (ahem).

=head2 Cookies and session management

We can use L<Test::Mojo> to test applications that keep session state in
cookies. By default, the L<Mojo::UserAgent> object in L<Test::Mojo> will
manage session for us by saving and sending cookies automatically, just like
common web browsers:

  use Mojo::Base -strict;

  use Test::Mojo;
  use Test::More;

  my $t = Test::Mojo->new('MyApp');

  # No authorization cookie
  $t->get_ok('/')
    ->status_is(401)
    ->content_is('Please log in');

  # Application sets an authorization cookie
  $t->post_ok('/login', { password => 'let me in' })
    ->status_is(200)
    ->content_is('You are logged in');

  # Sends the cookie from the previous transaction
  $t->get_ok('/')
    ->status_is(200)
    ->content_like(qr/You logged in at \d+/);

  # Clear the cookies
  $t->reset_session;

  # No authorization cookie again
  $t->get_ok('/')
    ->status_is(401)
    ->content_is('Please log in');

We can also inspect cookies in responses for special values through the
transaction's response (L<Mojo::Message::Response>) object:

  $t->get_ok('/');

  my ($cookie) = grep { $_->name eq 'smarty' } @{$t->tx->res->cookies};
  like($cookie && $cookie->to_string, qr(smarty=pants), 'cookie found');

=head2 Custom transactions

Let's say we have an application that responds to a new HTTP verb C<RING> and
to use it we must also pass in a secret cookie value. This is not a
problem. We can test the application by creating a L<Mojo::Transaction>
object, setting the cookie, then passing the transaction object to
C<request_ok>:

  # Use custom "RING" verb
  my $tx = $t->ua->build_tx(RING => '/doorbell');

  # Set a special cookie
  $tx->req->cookies({Secret => "don't tell anybody"});

  # Make the request
  $t->request_ok($tx)
    ->status_is(200)
    ->json_is('/status' => 'ding dong');

=head2 Testing WebSocket web services

While the message flow on WebSocket connections can be rather dynamic, it more
often than not is quite predictable, which allows this rather pleasant
L<Test::Mojo> API to be used.

  use Mojo::Base -strict;

  use Test::More;
  use Test::Mojo;

  # Include application
  use FindBin;
  require "$FindBin::Bin/../echo.pl";

  # Test echo web service
  my $t = Test::Mojo->new;
  $t->websocket_ok('/echo')
    ->send_ok('Hello Mojo!')
    ->message_ok
    ->message_is('echo: Hello Mojo!')
    ->finish_ok;

  # Test JSON web service
  $t->websocket_ok('/echo.json')
    ->send_ok({json => {test => [1, 2, 3]}})
    ->message_ok
    ->json_message_is('/test', [1, 2, 3])
    ->finish_ok;

  done_testing();

=head2 Extending L<Test::Mojo>

If you see that you're writing a lot of test assertions that aren't chainable,
you may benefit from writing your own test assertion. This example comes from
the L<Test::Mojo> documentation, but is worth examining closer:

  my $location_is = sub {
    my ($t, $value, $desc) = @_;
    $desc ||= "Location: $value";
    local $Test::Builder::Level = $Test::Builder::Level + 1;
    return $t->success(is($t->tx->res->headers->location, $value, $desc));
  };
  $t->get_ok('/')
    ->status_is(302)
    ->$location_is('http://mojolicious.org')
    ->or(sub { diag 'Must have been Joel!' });

We create an anonymous subroutine (C<$location_is>) whose method signature
matches other C<*_is> methods in L<Test::Mojo>. We create a default test
description (C<$desc>), set the L<Test::Builder> C<Level> global variable one
level higher (which tells L<Test::Builder> how far up the call stack to look
when something fails). Finally we use L<Test::More>'s C<is> method to compare
the location header with the expected header value. We wrap that in the
C<success> method, which propagates the object for method chaining.

=head3 Subclassing

In some situations you may find your tests have a lot of boilerplate setup
(authentication, etc.) and may want to subclass L<Test::Mojo> to handle
that. Because of some of the expectations of L<Test::Mojo> and how it handles
configuration data, subclassing takes a little extra work.

For an example let's say we have an RPC-based web application I<that is
already deployed>, where the HTTP method is always C<POST> and the remote
procedure name is in the URL, and we have a C<Basic> authorization header with
username C<me> and password C<secretly>.

All of our requests follow this basic pattern:

  POST /<service>/<method>
  Host: myapp.example.com
  Authorization: Basic bWU6c2VjcmV0bHkK=

  {"json":"payload"}

For example:

  POST /bedroom-light/power-on
  Host: myapp.example.com
  Authorization: Basic bWU6c2VjcmV0bHkK=

  {"level":"50%"}

Or:

  POST /blender/spin-blades
  Host: myapp.example.com
  Authorization: Basic bWU6c2VjcmV0bHkK=

  {"speed":"whip"}

Or:

  POST /thermostat/heat
  Host: myapp.example.com
  Authorization: Basic bWU6c2VjcmV0bHkK=

  {"temperature":"23°C"}

To test this kind of web application, we could do something like this for
every test:

  $t->post_ok('http://myapp.example.com/thermostat/heat',
              {Authorization => 'Basic bWU6c2VjcmV0bHkK='},
              json => {temperature => '23°F'})
    ->status_is(200);

But what we'd like to do is to make the tests as simple as regular
L<Mojolicious> tests:

  $t->post_ok('/thermostat/heat',
              json => {temperature => '23°F'});

To do this we're going to override L<Test::Mojo>'s constructor and L<post_ok>
methods. The constructur will accept a C<base_url>, C<username>, and
C<password> parameters. The C<post_ok> method will add the C<Authorization>
header for us.

Because L<Test::Mojo>'s constructor has some shortcuts built into it for
passing configuration data to Mojolicious applications, we can't invoke
C<SUPER::new> without removing our custom arguments first:

  package Test::MyApp;
  use Mojo::Base 'Test::Mojo';
  use Mojo::Util 'b64_encode';

  has [my @attr = qw/base_url username password/];

  sub new {
    my $class = shift;
    my %args  = @_;
    my %app   = ();

    # Remove custom attributes
    @app{@attr} = delete @args{@attr};

    my $self = $class->SUPER::new(%args);

    # Set custom attributes
    $self
      ->base_url($app{base_url})
      ->username($app{username})
      ->password($app{password});

    return $self;
  }

  sub post_ok {
    my $self    = shift;
    my $url     = $self->base_url . shift;
    my $headers = (ref $_[0] eq 'HASH' ? shift : {});
    $headers->{Authorization} //= 'Basic ' .
      b64_encode join(':' => $self->username, $self->password), '';

    $self->SUPER::post_ok($url, $headers, @_);
  }

  1;

Our version of C<post_ok> works just like L<Test::Mojo>'s, but it adds the
C<Authorization> header our web application needs for every call. To use our
new L<Test::Mojo> subclass:

  use Test::MyApp;
  use Test::More;

  my $t = Test::MyApp->new(base_url => 'http://myapp.example.com',
                           username => 'me',
                           password => 'secretly');

  $t->post_ok('/blender/faster',
              json => {speed => 'frappé'})
    ->status_is(200);

  # Use invalid password
  $t->password('sorry!');
  $t->post_ok('/blender/faster',
              json => {speed => 'frappé'})
    ->status_is(401);

  done_testing();

Great! Our little L<Test::Mojo>-based class allows us to make authorized
requests to our deployed web application, and the test assertion (C<post_ok>)
preserves compatibility with L<Test::Mojo>.

=head1 MORE

You can continue with L<Mojolicious::Guides> now or take a look at the
L<Mojolicious wiki|http://github.com/kraih/mojo/wiki>, which contains a lot
more documentation and examples by many different authors.

See also L<Test::Mojo>, L<Mojo::UserAgent>, L<Mojo::DOM>, L<Mojo::JSON>,
L<Mojo::JSON::Pointer>, and L<Mojo::Transaction> for additional API
information referenced in this tutorial.

=head1 SUPPORT

If you have any questions the documentation might not yet answer, don't
hesitate to ask on the
L<mailing list|http://groups.google.com/group/mojolicious> or the official IRC
channel C<#mojo> on C<irc.perl.org>
(L<chat now!|https://chat.mibbit.com/?channel=%23mojo&server=irc.perl.org>).

=cut
